My name is Ben Trumbull and
I'm a senior engineer with the
Development Technologies Group here
at Apple and Steve Minehr is going
to be assisting us with some demos
and he's one of our fellow engineers.
So this year we're going to try to
do something a little bit different.
We're going to try to provide a brief
overview of a variety of topics,
some topics that have
challenged you in the past.
So last year we talked about some things
with validation and key value coding,
and we're going to try to
just skip over all that stuff.
So basically this session
isn't about anything.
You can find the documentation
for the most part.
And the documentation of particular
relevance to this particular topic,
EOF, is going to be the 5.2
Delta documentation,
and I believe they call it
What's New in 5.2 on the website,
and the EOF Developer Guide.
So can I have a show of hands
of who's actually read the
republished EOF Developer Guide?
It was redone, rewritten this February?
So Brent Shank and all the
people in TechPubs did a
fantastic job rewriting this.
It includes most of the material.
It includes most of the material
from last year's advanced session,
so we're going to have
to keep pushing further.
So when I said a brief overview,
we've got about five slides for
all the multithraded programming.
This is going to go pretty quick.
It's really more about identifying
obstacles and getting you
to ask the right questions.
And then you can go back to
documentation or community resource,
one of the mailing lists,
to get more information.
So first on our agenda is
memory management in EOF.
We're going to assume you know
something about how garbage collection
works in Java and the difference
between strong and weak references.
Some interesting point is you can create
your own subclass for weak reference,
and EOF does this.
It's a handy little trick.
EOF also uses a mechanism called faults,
and faults are Enterprise Objects
that have not been initialized yet.
So they're lazy initialization at work,
and they provide assistance in
memory management as the boundary
for the active object graph.
So everything beyond the fault
is not fetched from the database.
Deferred faults are a special kind of
fault used in too many relationships,
and they're significantly more
memory efficient because until
you touch them the first time,
they are empty.
They don't have anything.
They're just a little fault.
And then they grow to expand to
include one fault for each object
in the too many relationship.
And finally, shared ending contexts,
another mechanism you can
use to reduce your memory.
And it's probably best to think of
these as read-only object stores,
and we'll talk more about that later.
So a lot of changes went into
5.2 sort of under the hood,
so hopefully not too
much API impact on you,
but a lot of things did happen.
And the first is a lot of complaints
about editing contexts using strong
references to their Enterprise Objects.
This has been changed.
Enterprise Objects are now
held with weak references,
so the garbage collector can come
along and just start pruning the
object graph of things that you're
no longer accessing directly.
Only modified objects,
so things that are inserted, deleted,
or updated are still retained.
And Enterprise Objects have a reference
back to their editing context now
and it will hold the editing context
in memory until it's done using it.
So you have to be careful not to have
any Enterprise Objects floating around,
but this is better than previous
years where if the editing context
got garbage collected first,
the Enterprise Object was
no longer very useful.
Consequence of these changes
is that the registered objects
method is not really useful.
Since these objects are going to
be pruned just sort of randomly
by the garbage collecting thread,
you can't account on
anything still being there.
I know people in the past have
bound their woke components
to this method to just grab
everything in the editing context.
You really are never going
to know what you get.
If you want to lock an
object graph into memory,
you can use set retains registered
objects on an editing context.
And you can only do this when the editing
context doesn't have any objects in it,
but that will change the way
it works and it will hold
everything with strong reference.
And shared editing contexts
always use strong references,
otherwise they wouldn't be very useful.
So a bit about faulting.
Something many people don't realize
is that the size of your fault
is the same as the size of the
Enterprise Object that it represents.
Deferred faults, as I mentioned earlier,
are significantly more memory
efficient than the too many
relationships they represent.
And Enterprise Objects can extend
EO Generic Record to transparently
inherit the deferred faulting feature.
If you subclass directly
from EO Custom Object,
you're not going to get
deferred faulting by default.
And Awake from Fetch and
Awake from Insertion.
So this is on the faulting page
because faults are constructed the
same way Enterprise Objects are.
And this is due to strong typing in Java.
So we've got to create a new
Enterprise Object when we're
creating a fault and vice versa.
This means that if you have a
constructor on your Enterprise Object,
you're going to start doing
things while we're faulting.
This is bad.
It defeats the purpose
of lazy initialization.
In addition, when the fault gets fired,
that's when EOF thinks that it's
going to finish the initialization.
So it's going to overwrite stuff and
it might just ignore things completely.
And typically,
at the time that the constructor in an
Enterprise Object is invoked by the VM,
that object is not inserted
into the editing context.
So that means any changes you
make in there aren't going to get
noticed by the editing context.
And that breaks pretty much everything.
So you really,
really have to use Awake from
Fetch and Awake from Insertion.
So some basic memory optimizations.
Blobs and clobs should be
factored into their own tables and
accessed through a relationship.
And then the relationship can be
faulted and keep the in-memory
object graph as small as possible.
Some other things that some people do,
you know, you don't want to
over-optimize too early,
but having too many relationships not
be a class property can be very helpful.
So there's a lot of overhead
in managing a relationship,
or there can be,
particularly for a very large too many.
So if you don't need both sides of the
relationship between two related EOs,
you can have it be a unidirectional
relationship instead of bidirectional.
And you can put rarely used attributes
across the relationship the same
way you would with a blob or a clob.
And you can replace the too
many entirely with a fetch.
And one of the nice things about this
is it can be vended as a Java method.
And to key value coding
and the rest of EOF,
it looks exactly like a property
on your Enterprise Object.
But instead, it can be a hand-coded fetch
that's doing something special.
Thank you.
So shared editing context.
I like to think of this as probably one
of the most badly named classes in EOF.
And it's not that it's
too long or too short,
and it's not that technically
it's not a shared editing context.
It is.
Unfortunately,
The best behavior is a
read-only object store.
It's not really an editing context,
and if you try to use it
just like an editing context,
you're going to run into some problems.
And if you try to use it as a
shared area of read/write EOs,
you're also going to
run into some problems.
It's best is using read-only EOs in here,
and then you can modify other EOs related
to them in your regular editing contexts.
The main advantage of this,
despite those complications,
is you get to reuse the memory for
the entire Enterprise Object instead
of just the row-level snapshots,
which is what normally happens
between editing contexts.
And it's very important not to
have outgoing relationships.
So if you have a relationship
coming from a shared EO going into
an EO in a regular editing context,
EOF will be very unhappy with you.
And shared editing contexts and
regular editing contexts should all
use the same object store coordinator.
So we'll touch more on that in a sec.
So you've got a million EOs.
The most important advice I can give you
is to divide the operations into batches.
Most users are not going to interact with
a million EOs at the same time anyway,
and if they're browsing
through a result set,
they're probably only going to browse
the first few sets before they get bored.
So that's the best advice.
You can use raw rows,
and you can fetch back just the
primary keys or some other subset
of the EO so you don't have to
bring the full EO into memory.
And Project Wonder already has
some of this stuff done for you,
so you can use their fetch specification
batch iterator to do batching,
and it basically actually
incorporates all these ideas,
and it gives tons of
stuff in Project Wonder.
So a more advanced technique
that you can use is you can
intercept the rows as they're
being fetched at the adapter level.
And you can use a custom
JDBC channel subclass.
You can override fetchRow,
and as you're going through,
you can use a row and then throw it away.
And in this way, EOF will not keep all of
the results set in memory.
And Dave Newman,
who was one of the speakers
for the previous session,
actually has done this and got an order
of magnitude improvement in peak memory
use for one of his reporting tools.
So it works.
Okay,
so next on our agenda is data freshness.
EOF is a big cache, and it's caching the
rows from your database.
And editing contexts build an object
graph mapping on top of this cache.
So data freshness is about when and
how to refresh those cache lines,
and in EOF we call them snapshots.
Refaulting is about taking an
Enterprise Object and turning it
back into an uninitialized fault.
This is an important mechanism for
saving memory as it prunes entire
branches out of the object graph.
Invalidating is a little
bit like refaulting,
and a lot of people get the two mixed up.
The main difference is unlike
gently shearing the object graph,
you're using a chainsaw.
Fetch timestamps measure
staleness for those snapshots,
and the EO database object is the
cache object that you can work with,
and you can get at it through
the EO database context through
your object store coordinator.
So just to really kind of
home in on why refaulting is
much better than invalidation,
refaulting affects only
one editing context.
There are no notifications,
no effect on other editing
contexts or other user sessions.
The existing snapshot gets
reused if it's fresh enough,
and there's no trip back to the database.
So it's much more gentle
on your performance.
Now, if the snapshot's too stale,
then it will have to go
back to the database,
refetch that row,
and get you something that's fresh
enough for your configuration.
and that will post a notification.
Invalidating affects the whole stack.
It affects everyone using
that object store coordinator.
Editing context can lose changes for that
object because you've just smashed it,
and the snapshot will be discarded,
and the next time any editing
context touches that object,
which is now a fault,
a round trip to the database will occur.
Now, sometimes you do have to invalidate,
so some things to keep in mind.
You really don't want to end up in
a position where you've basically
invalidated a lot of objects.
They're now faults,
and you're going through and you're
telling EOF one at a time and firing
those faults to go back to the database,
because that's going to cause thousands
of round trips to the database.
That's something you want to avoid.
Batch faulting in your relationship
can help immorality some of this,
but really a manual fetch with
an object to fetch specification
is probably the best way to go.
You invalidate a set of
objects that you know about,
and then you go and you do a
fetch for the working set that
you expect to be using next.
And this way,
you're going to minimize faulting.
And prefetch and keypass are
extremely useful for doing this and
grabbing a whole lot of data at once.
So Refresh Object,
I believe this is introduced in 5.1.
It's a smarter refault object.
It merges changes back into
the Enterprise Object in
that editing context.
So it'll pick up any changes
that occurred to the snapshot.
It skips over inserts,
which can't be refaulted,
and it reuses the existing row
snapshot unless it's too stale.
So the most important thing to understand
about fetch timestamps is they just
don't work the way you want them to.
Fetch timestamp lag is relative,
and it defaults to one hour.
And you're not really going to have
a whole lot of interaction with this.
But what this means is when a
new edit context gets created,
its fetch timestamp gets
set to one hour ago.
And that's all the data
it considers fresh enough.
So those fetch timestamps
are always absolute,
like June 25th,
4.15 p.m., if we created an
edit context right about now.
And no matter how long the
edit context stays around,
say three days in your application,
it's going to consider all
the data since June 25th,
4.15 p.m., to be fresh enough.
Most people don't want that.
And right now,
you're going to have to work
around it by periodically
resetting the fetch timestamp.
A good place to do that
is in session awake.
That's a great time, a callback.
You know the user is now
interacting with that default
session editing context again.
You can also refresh rows with a
fetch specification and setting
the setRefreshedObject flag.
And did I mention prefetching?
It's a great way to get
lots of data at once.
So another advanced technique,
and I haven't seen very
many people do this.
The EOF database is your snapshot cache,
and EOF is a big cache.
So by directly manipulating this object,
you can do some pretty cool things
and really improve performance.
You can cheat at faulting.
If you've gotten a row back from
the database using raw rows or one
customer used some custom JDBC code,
writing raw JDBC code,
he implemented a cursor,
pulled that stuff back,
and now he sets those rows into EOF.
He records the snapshot,
calls fault for global ID,
and he's good to go.
You can also preflight
a too-many relationship.
This is particularly
useful for inserted EOs.
So inserted EOs begin life
with a too-many fault,
and most of the time, that fault,
when it goes to the database,
there aren't going to be any records
there because it's a brand-new EO.
Sometimes it could be if
you've got multiple writers,
but for the most part,
those relationships tend to be empty.
But EOF doesn't know that.
So the first time you touch that fault,
you modify that newly saved object.
It's going to fire.
It's going to go to the database,
and it could be -- there could
be a lot of records there,
so you might want to just skip that.
And you can use record snapshot
for source global ID to do that.
And to refresh a too-many snapshot,
a lot of people ask questions about this,
so pass in null,
and that will blow away the snapshot
for that too-many relationship,
and then it will be refetched.
And you have to remember to lock and
unlock the object store coordinator,
and that's the one that's associated
with the database context that's
using this EO database object.
Okay, so we're going to spend some
time with optimistic locking now.
There's an entire chapter on optimistic
locking in the new EOF Developer Guide,
Update Strategies,
and mostly the subject is
about dealing with multiple
writers affecting the same data.
Basically, it's about cache validity
and what to do when multiple
people change the same thing.
And this can happen when
you've got deployments with
multiple WebObjects instances.
If you're using a single application,
you've got multiple
EO Objects or coordinators,
they're going to have their
own channels to the database,
and they can make changes
that interact with each other.
Or you have external writers,
someone who's got an admin
app that's doing raw SQL or
something outside your control.
So the material we just talked
about in data freshness is pretty
important in avoiding this problem.
Obviously,
if you don't ever modify stale data,
you're going to be much better off.
So you can tweak your fetch timestamps
to keep the data fresh enough.
If you keep the data too fresh,
then you have performance problems as
you're always going back to the database.
And you can also implement code to
propagate a distributed notification.
However,
EOF does not at this time implement
distributed notifications itself.
There are a variety of
third-party solutions,
and here are two, one from Wirehose and
one from Project Wonder,
and they're both free,
so you can check those out.
Recovering from this problem,
basically you have to catch an
EO General Adapter exception.
We're going to have a demo and
I'll show you where that is.
It's also in the developer guide.
But basically that's your hook for
implementing a recovery specific to your
application because EOF doesn't know
if you want to have the first save win,
the last save win,
you want to do a merge.
It's really specific
to what you're doing.
The EO adapter operation in
the User Info Dictionary,
that exception,
is one of the most important parts.
It's got the attempted row
changes and operation type code,
so inserted, updated, deleted, or locked.
And then the EO database operation has
a reference to the Enterprise Object as
well as the out-of-sync stale snapshot.
And as you're recovering from
an optimistic locking exception,
keep in mind that refaulting is going to
remove that EO from the updated lists.
So if it's a deleted or updated object,
it's just going to get refaulted
and the editing context is
going to forget about that.
And you can't refault a newly
inserted Enterprise Object.
So it's best to basically pull out
the deltas from the Enterprise Object,
refault it,
and then apply those deltas again.
And in the process of
applying those deltas again,
the editing context will notice
that the object has changed again.
So we're going to go to demo two now.
And something new in WebObjects 5.2
is multiple channels to the database.
You can do simultaneous operations.
We're going to talk a little
bit more about this later.
But basically, you're just creating your
own object store coordinator,
and we've got a new thread here.
And I'm doing something pretty simple
just to show you how to recover from
an optimistic locking exception.
And in my application constructor,
I just create this new thread.
So first you're going to want
to do the save and catch the
general adapter exception.
And then you're going to have to
check the user info dictionary
to find out whether or not it's
actually an optimistic locking
exception or something else entirely.
So you can do that by getting this key
out of the dictionary and then checking.
Handy little method.
This is documented,
but it is a little obtuse,
so I'll go through all of it.
When you handle all of this,
you want to get the adapter operation
out of that user info dictionary,
which has got everything just
sort of jumbled together.
And from that adapter operation,
you get the operation type code,
which you can use to
decide what you want to do,
as well as the database operation here.
And the database operation
has your failed EO.
You can get a delta dictionary from
the adapter operation and the current
snapshot from the database operation.
And I believe in this example
I just assume I'm using the
session's default editing context,
but you can pull the
editing context off of the
Enterprise Object itself if you want to.
And our recovery mechanism
is just last write wins.
What you see here,
we grabbed the delta above
from the adapter operation,
we refault the object,
and this line we just
used for our component,
we reapply the changes,
and we'll go back and save again
because it's in a little loop.
So this is just using the
real estate example framework.
And housing prices aren't really
going up very much anymore.
They used to be going up more.
And so these are a whole bunch of things
that our background thread decided to
change while we were working at it.
That's pretty much it.
So we're going to go back to slides.
Next we're going to talk
about multithreading in EOF.
So there are a variety of good
books available about multithreading
in Java and we can't really go
into just general multithreading in
Java because that's a pretty big topic.
Concurrent Programming in
Java by Doug Lees in my library.
It's a pretty good book and
there are just a zillion of them.
You probably want to pick up several.
So some necessary concepts that
we're just going to skip over:
synchronized methods
and synchronized blocks,
try-finally blocks,
and the wait and notify
methods on object.
And then the WebObjects 5.2 Delta doc on
the What's New area has more information
about locking issues specific to EOF.
and David are all
involved in the process.
Java applications are
always multithreaded,
whether you like it or not.
The object finalization thread,
so this has nothing
to do with WebObjects.
The object finalization
occurs in a separate thread.
So if you have a finalizer,
those finalizer methods are going
to get executed in another thread.
That's just the way it is.
With WebObjects applications,
there's also the session timeout thread,
and that's also going to
be doing EOF operations.
And then there are timers, notifications,
So here's proper use of try finally.
You just want to lock the resource,
do the try, use it.
You really never want to mess
with the lock object itself.
It's extraordinarily
difficult to do properly.
It usually involves having another
lock object just to manage it.
It's kind of Heisenberg effect.
So you pretty much want
to leave those alone.
So EOF's contract with you,
and this is again talked
more about in the Delta doc,
is that you have to lock everything
that you access directly.
It's just the way it is.
The locking,
in addition to everything else it does,
helps keep EOF informed about what
resources you're using at any given time.
The NSLocking interface is for all the
objects that support thread-safe use.
Objects that don't implement NSLocking,
like NSRays and NSDictionary's,
you're going to have to protect yourself,
so you can just create an
NSRecursiveLock to do that.
Trylock is amazingly useful,
and it's supported by
NSRecursiveLock and EOEditingContext,
two of the main
interactions with locking.
And what this lets you do is
execute an operation only if
you're certain you won't block.
So that's great.
You can queue up an operation,
happen later if you think you will block,
and it's used in the
notification delivery mechanism.
Control slash or kill dash quit
to the process ID produces a stack
trace of every thread in the JVM and
I can't recommend this too highly.
It's a phenomenal debugging aid.
You get to see what all
the threads are doing.
The JVM will tell you which
locks they're waiting on.
It's really the only
reason I'm still here.
Optimize It and JProbe are
both commercial products.
They can help you debug
multithreading issues and they
also support memory performance
and CPU performance profiling.
So they're really great products.
You can check them out.
The main lock you're going to interact
with in EOF is on the editing context.
This controls all kinds of things.
Now,
it's true that nested editing contexts
share the same lock as their parent.
However, you still have to lock it.
This is the contract that you have
with EOF and EOF has with you.
Basically,
the only consequence of this that you
can depend on is multiple threads can't
come in and use the same hierarchy of
nested editing contexts at the same time.
You can't cheat at locking this way.
Well, you can try, but...
Shared Edit Context Lock themselves,
and they're the only
objects in EOF to do so.
Otherwise, it just gets to be a
nightmare to maintain them.
But basically, they're the only object
in EOF to do this,
and it's really important
to lock everything else.
You always have to lock the
editing context before you access
any of its Enterprise Objects.
So even operations you think
would be read-only or sort
of intrinsically thread-safe,
they're not.
There's faulting going
on behind your back.
There's a lot of caching in the
frameworks themselves that's going on,
a lot of transparent operations to
keep the object graph maintained,
to keep memory down.
You just have to lock everything.
And the EO Object Store Coordinators
will lock all of their cooperating object
stores if you ask them to lock directly,
and those are usually
your database contexts.
So what you see here is a
threads view of the EOF stack.
The EO Object Store Coordinator is
the focal point.
It's sort of the center of mass for EOF.
And it serves as a mediator between the
EO control and the EO access layers.
This diagram is a little oversimplified.
There are callbacks and
delegates and stuff.
But this is your basic idea
of how threading works in EOF.
And the Object Store Coordinator is
the center of it all.
So multithreading in EOF,
there are a couple remaining bottlenecks.
The critical sections in these
classes tend to be very small,
but if you're doing something that
does a lot of models or entity work,
you're parsing models or you're
creating your own models on the fly,
you should be aware that there are
some concurrency implications there.
And the allows concurrent request
handling flag only affects WebObjects,
the WebObjects Framework,
not WebObjects and EOF.
This affects how requests are dispatched
to both sessions and direct actions and
any other request handlers you have.
And it has no effect on EOF.
So like I said,
both the Object Finalizer thread
and the Session Timeout thread are
going to be doing EOF operations
whether you like it or not,
and this is to deal with
memory management and snapshots
and a bunch of other things.
So it's really important to keep
the editing context locked properly.
One thing I have seen some customers
do is they lock an editing context,
they use it to do one little
thing and then they unlock it.
You can lock it for as
long as you need to.
If you're not going to share that
editing context with another thread,
you can just keep it locked.
You don't have to make the
locks really fine-grained.
That's the point of implementing
these locks on these objects is
to allow you the flexibility to
control the grain of the locking.
So my life might have purpose.
Some stuff that I learned
painfully while working on EOF.
Non-parallel locks are like debts.
If you've got more than three locks
and they're all somehow related,
you will regret it.
Intersecting locks increase
the probability of deadlock.
So the more locks that any thread
needs to acquire to get its work done,
the greater likelihood some bug
is going to come along and cause
your application to deadlock.
Because some threads will have
some of the locks and some
threads will have other locks.
And this is a permutation that
increases combinatorially.
It's ugly.
And unfortunately,
these apps tend to work very well in
development and not so well in deployment
under high stress after many days.
So those are kinds of
bugs I like to avoid.
Something that a lot of people
don't realize is the synchronized
method and the synchronized block,
these are their own implicit lock object.
And it's on either that Java lang object
or the Java class that you're working on,
depending on the kind of
synchronized statement.
So you can deadlock with these and you
can crosslock with the synchronized
statement and an actual lock object.
And if you come in and you block
inside a synchronized block,
you do some I/O or you try
to grab a different lock,
no other thread is going to be
able to do anything involving that
object with that synchronized.
So it's not going to be able to
execute any synchronized methods,
not even the little one-line
setters and getters.
And that's usually not what
people intend to have happen.
So if you're going to lock for
something that you expect might block,
like either acquiring a new lock,
doing some I/O, something expensive,
you should do it outside
a synchronized scope.
And you can use the NS recursive lock.
I prefer that because it allows you to
use the try finally syntax regardless
of what the call stack looks like.
So you can just keep invoking
methods recursively or not.
Or you can use Java's wait
notify protocol if you
feel comfortable with that.
Okay, so we're going to talk about a
new feature in WebObjects 5.2,
and this is concurrent database access.
and that's putting all those new threads
that you've learned how to create
to use and to do a bunch of things
simultaneously with your database.
As the diagram showed,
the EO Object Store Coordinator is
the root of everything in the
EOF in terms of threading.
So each EO Object Store Coordinator has
its own stack underneath it,
its own set of locks,
its own database channels,
and its own snapshot cache.
So they're extremely independent.
Notifications between them don't -- well,
there are no notifications
in between them,
so they're very independent.
It's pretty easy to do.
Just create a new one,
pass it on to the constructor
for your editing context.
You can also change the default
object store coordinator.
and I believe in
Project Wonder there's now an object
store coordinator pool you can use.
So you can use these independent
stacks any way you'd like,
but there are some benefits to using
raw row operations with these stacks.
And that's there's no overhead
from duplicated snapshots
so there's less memory use.
And you're not worried about
propagating notifications.
The actual concurrency is
throttled by your database,
so you have to make sure that
your database is set up to
keep adding more channels.
All right.
And we're on to raw rows.
So these are the lowest level
operations you can use in EOF.
And they allow you to bypass
the entire EOF control layer.
They'll return a result set
in NSArray of NSDictionary's.
And each raw row is
itself an NSDictionary.
There's no object graph management,
no undo/redo, no relationships,
no faulting, which may be good.
And there's no row caching.
And you can use hand-coded SQL.
So the EOF fetch specification,
you can just take a fetch specification,
you set this flag,
and you'll get back raw rows
instead of Enterprise Objects.
Really easy to do,
probably the best way to get started.
You can also pass in the custom SQL hint,
and this will allow you
to pass in optimized SQL,
something specific to your database,
or you can do something that EOF won't
generate automatically for you.
My other favorite is raw rows for SQL,
really easy to use,
and there are a bunch of other areas in
EOF where you can interact at this level.
So some things to keep in mind while
you're using raw rows is that both
Enterprise Objects and Dictionaries
implement NSKeyValue coding.
So you can make instance variables type
to NSKeyValue coding the interface,
and then as you're processing
the results from either an
Enterprise Objects request,
a fetch, or a raw row fetch,
those results can be
displayed in the same code.
So the same code path can reuse them.
That's really useful with both
components or UI layer work.
You can promote raw rows into
full EOs as long as you fetch
the primary key attributes.
And you can demote EOs back into
their primary keys if you want
to return to bare metal work.
And the Think Movies example
that ships with Valve Objects
demonstrates these ideas.
So it uses the primary key
to do direct action-based
work and there's no sessions.
So there are a couple of features
that EOF doesn't provide at this time,
and you can use raw
SQL to get these features.
They're pretty handy.
So there's in-qualification
and null relationship
qualification or sub-queries.
And again, Project Wonder has got some of
these things built in for you,
so they're query operators for you,
and it's a good reason
to go check it out.
And now Steve Mine is going to come
up and give you a demonstration.
Hi, thanks Ben.
Alright,
I have a demonstration here for how
to execute SQL using the EOF stack.
I've written a little SQL tool that just
is similar to any command line tool that
you might get from your database vendor.
The advantage to my tool is I can use
it with any model and if I don't have
a local database vendor's SQL tool,
I can use this to make changes
to my database or just to
explore a little bit on the data.
Before I get into that,
I want to show you the code.
It's very easy to execute.
[Transcript missing]
You can add that model to a group,
the EO Model Group.
Take a look at that.
That's just a way of
grouping multiple models.
You probably use that when you're
developing your applications.
The Model Group knows about all your
entities across the set of models.
You have to make sure you don't have any
entity name conflicts within your group.
So the next thing you have
to do is collect an adapter.
Given a model,
you can always say adapter with model.
That will instantiate the adapter
and that allows you to make
your connection to the database.
The adapter context is your
scope for your transactions.
You don't have to interact too
much with your adapter context,
but the adapter context also
allows you to create a channel.
And a channel at the adapter
level is the entity that,
or the object that knows how to
actually do a query to the database.
So with that, just a few lines of code,
you can get set up so
you've opened a channel,
now you have a way of talking
directly to your database.
I'm going to show you how the
SQL command actually executes the SQL.
and I will just slide down a bit.
So given an adapter channel,
There's just one line here
that's going to execute SQL.
Your SQL string is just
a regular Java string.
We have to convert that into
an expression that an adapter
channel knows how to use.
So we ask the adapter for
its expression factory,
and the expression factory has a
method called expression for string.
That expression converts it into an
expression that we just call evaluate
expression on the adapter channel.
That sends a SQL to the database.
We get back a result set.
Our results are going to be
an array of dictionaries.
So you can see here what we
do is set up a mutable array.
We have to tell the adapter channel what
the result set is going to look like.
I want to take a minute to
show you how we specify that.
I'll come back to that in a second.
Once we've told the adapter channel
what the result set will look like,
we call fetchRow multiple
times until we get back a null.
Each of those rows is a dictionary.
We're holding on to our
own result set this way.
When we're setting up the result set,
there's one method in the adapter
channel called describeResults.
After you've made a
query to the database,
the database knows what the
result set will look like.
The adapter channel has a method called
describeResults that's specialized for
whatever adapter you happen to be using.
It will create an
NSArray of EO attributes.
So, if you're doing raw SQL,
the adapter channel doesn't know
anything about any particular attributes.
We have to synthesize,
make new attributes on the fly
to describe each of those result
columns that are coming back.
Now, one thing in normal EOF operations,
we never have any name conflicts,
but when you're doing raw SQL,
your result dictionaries are
going to use the column labels
that the database gives us.
In SQL, there's... the results
are returned by position,
so there's not any problem
with name conflicts.
But if you're doing
some complicated join,
and two of those columns
happen to have the same name,
when we turn that into a dictionary,
we're going to smash some values,
because we're going to
be using the same keys.
So, I have a few lines of code here
just to walk through the result
set and change the attribute
names if there's any conflicts.
We can also use that a bit later to
manipulate the result set so it's
more convenient to use when you want
to turn things back into real EOs.
All right,
so that's enough code to look at.
Let's, what is that again?
So now back to the demo.
This command line tool,
you can just type SQL to it,
it executes it.
There's a few other commands it knows
about in dealing with your model.
For the demo purposes,
there's a command that I call demo
that's going to load the commands
from a text file so that way you won't
have to watch me make any mistypes.
So one reason you might
want to use SQL is if you're
generating some kind of report,
you're doing something with
SQL aggregate functions,
or you're doing a complicated
query that EOF doesn't have a
facility or a way of expressing.
If you're doing, in this case,
we want to get the
minimum value for revenue,
the maximum value,
and the average out of the movie table.
So we execute that.
We got back just a raw
row that's a dictionary,
and then you can see each of the
labels and each of the results.
For display purposes,
I'm just running down the dictionary
showing you the keys and the values.
Another common thing
is to ask for a count.
Count* is kind of a special
aggregate function in SQL.
In this case,
we want to take a look and find all the
movies that start with the letter C.
So we're going to get back just a result,
a single dictionary,
or a dictionary with a single entry,
that's the count.
You might do something like this if you
want to customize your user interface
according to how big the result set is.
If you just have a few objects,
you might display it one way.
If you have millions of objects,
you might want to do something different.
We're going to come back
to this a little bit later.
I want to show you a bit of a trick,
a way to do this by staying
in the normal object world,
using objects with fetch specification.
This is how you do it in straight SQL.
All right,
so now we figured out what our count was.
Now we want to actually go out and
get some bits of those movie rows.
In this case, I'm asking for the movie
ID and for the title.
That's useful if you're doing
some kind of display list.
We're getting back these dictionaries.
They're not full EOs.
We're not keeping any snapshots here,
but you can put up a display of all the,
say, titles.
And because you're
saving also the movie ID,
you can convert those
back into EOs later.
Okay,
so those were pretty simple SQL examples.
You probably wouldn't need to
execute straight SQL to do that.
But a more complicated
query in the EOF world is,
in this case, find all the movies
that have no director.
I want to take a second,
go back to EOModeler,
and just remind you what the
model looks like for movies.
This is our basic example.
We have a movie table,
and it has basically a many-to-many
relationship with the talent table.
So any movie could have
multiple directors,
and of course any director
could direct multiple movies.
So when you're modeling that
in a SQL relational database,
you need a correlation table.
In this case, we called it Director.
So a director is just a pair of
the movie ID and the talent ID.
That allows us to form the
many-to-many relationship.
Back to our SQL.
So the question is how do we find
all the movies that have no director?
If we were doing that with a
normal fetch specification,
well, we'd have to write some
code actually in EOF.
We'd have to get all the movies,
check each of their directors'
too many relationships,
find all those with a count of zero.
And that's perfectly easy to do,
but if you have a large data set,
that's going to do a bit of
work in fetching all that
information from the database.
And in SQL, you can pretty much do that
sort of thing in just one query.
Here I'm doing a subquery and
using the SQL in operator.
So we want to find out all the movies
that have a movie ID where that movie
ID does not exist in the director table.
That's the same thing as
saying it has no directors.
So we can just execute that directly.
And again, I'm getting the title back
just for display purposes.
The main thing if you're doing
something else with an EO is
to get back that primary key,
which is the movie ID here.
Alright,
so that was a fairly simple query.
A little more complicated query:
you want to find all the movies
that have more than one director.
Okay, this is a good one for all
you sequel experts out there.
You can think about this a bit.
I came up with this line of sequel.
What I'm doing here is joining the
director table and the movie table.
That basically kind of gives me
all the director-movie pairs.
Then I'm, for each of those directors
that have directed a movie,
I'm looking in the director
table for anyone else who's
directed that same movie.
Okay, and I'm taking account of all those
talent IDs where those movie IDs match.
And that's in a subquery
that I'm comparing that,
so I'm saying greater than one,
because I want to find all the movies
that have more than one director.
Okay, this would be,
take the same kind of loop if you're
just writing regular EOF code.
You'd have to go fetch all the movies,
fetch all the directors.
And check their counts.
So here we have six results.
Again, I just fetched the
titles and the movie IDs.
Now, given any primary key,
of course you can go
select the right row.
Here I want to select the
movie given my primary key,
so 111.
Let's see what I get.
This is a raw row now.
I said select star.
So when I say select star,
I don't really have much control
over the label in that dictionary.
The database is then going
to decide what labels to use.
We're translating those labels into
the keys for the result dictionary.
Now you may notice that it's
using all capital letters.
That's typical for SQL.
The labels are all caps.
When I want to turn this
back into a movie EO,
I need to have a dictionary,
a primary key dictionary,
that matches the name of my attribute
that was used in the primary key.
So I need to change the key.
And what I've done here
in my little application,
I've kept a small dictionary
where I can do key mapping.
So I'm going to say, okay,
whenever you give me a result set,
and I map that uppercase
movie_id into movie_id,
that'll give me a good result.
All right,
so I'm just going to execute that again.
And you'll see the only
difference here that matters,
right, is I have a key here,
the underscore movie ID.
Now, another way to do this,
often in SQL, if you're specifying
your whole select list,
you can say what label to use for any
particular column that's coming back.
And so you might just put a label there,
call it movie ID,
put it in double quotes so
you control the case that way.
But people have had a problem when
they're doing raw rows for SQL.
Sometimes they're doing a join,
they get either name collisions or
they get the wrong case on something.
So in an upcoming update,
there's going to be a new version of
raw rows with SQL that gives you an
extra parameter where you can specify
the mapping for all those column names.
That might make it a
little easier to use.
So, we said before we can select
with SQL to get things,
but you can also do a lot of this
kind of stuff just in regular
EOF using fetch specifications.
So I want to show you here how to
fetch an object using a primary key.
Let me go back to the model and
show you a fetch specification.
So, in DeepFetch 1 Movie,
this is used in the Think Movies example,
we're doing a qualifier that's
based on the movie ID and we
have a qualifier variable,
in this case $MYMOVIE.
So when you use this fetch specification,
you need to have a binding
for that qualifier variable.
You can think of this fetch
specification as kind of a template.
So when you bind something to it,
you create a new fetch specification.
We're using movie ID.
Now if you remember,
movie ID is the primary
key for the movie entity,
but it, let me go back and show
you the movie entity.
Movie ID is not marked
as a class property.
Okay,
so that's maybe not obvious to everyone,
but you can qualify over attributes
that are not class properties.
As long as they're in your model,
we know how to map
things with your entity.
All right.
So we have a simple fetch here.
We're fetching all Enterprise Objects.
Let me execute this command.
EO is a command that's
built into my little tool.
It basically just calls an object with
primary key value and does a real fetch.
In the display here,
I have a real movie and we're
showing the primary key and
I'm showing all the attributes.
Of course, the advantage to getting real
EOs is you can use key value coding.
Here I'm going to fetch that
same movie and then apply the
key value coding studio.name.
It executed that, got that EO,
found the studio, which is another EO,
and then went and got the name out of it.
That's much easier than writing all
the SQL to go get that particular name.
I want to show you another
fetch with a qualifier variable.
Okay, so this one is just the
explicit with the deep fetch.
The deep fetch is doing the same
thing as my other command did.
Coming back here,
I have another fetch specification.
This one is a raw fetch specification,
so I'm getting an
attribute called ZCount.
I'm going to take a look at that in
a second in how that was modeled.
Qualifier is checking the title,
so it's title-like, my title,
my title is going to be some
pattern that we have to bind to.
Now remember, we're fetching ZCount,
we're doing a raw fetch,
so we're not getting back folios,
we're just getting back
a value for ZCount.
And if you look at movie,
ZCount is an attribute
that's not a class property,
so it's not part of your EO's class,
but it's defined in the entity,
and our definition for that is count*.
So we're going to use that
SQL expression count* in the fetch
specification when we execute it.
So this is an alternative to using
raw SQL and it keeps you in the
normal EOF fetch specification world.
It's a little bit easier to maintain
than executing your own SQL.
So I'm binding C* to my title.
Now I'm going to fetch using
that count for title like.
So I found out that there's
five movies on that count.
And again,
this is a way if you have to adjust your
interface to how big your result set is,
it might make sense you want
to go find a count first.
and just to show you,
if we can fetch those same
movies once we have them,
we know how big it is.
I'm doing a raw fetch here just to
get the movie IDs and displaying it.
So that's the end of my demo here.
What I want to do is give you
a feel for the fact that you
can execute any SQL you want.
It's good for generating some kind
of reports or complicated queries.
But for other things you want to take
a look and try to use Objects with
Fetch Specification when you can.
Thank you, Steve.
So today we reviewed memory management,
data freshness, optimistic locking,
multithreading in EOF,
concurrent database access,
and raw row operations.
I note about the forthcoming
WebObjects 5.2.2 update.
The main focus of this update is on
MacOSX server and J2E integration,
particularly with JBoss.
But there's some EOF impact,
some goodies here like log4j support,
and some JNDI lookup for
your application properties,
as well as assorted bug fixing.
So the Apple Technical Publications
Group has got tons of documentation
and this is the stuff that I use.
and particularly the
EOF Developer Developer Guide and
the 5.2 Delta doc are both very
important and the API reference.
Reporting bugs, bugreport.apple.com.
If you don't file it,
we won't know about it.
Probably.
Project Wonder - lots of
interesting extensions to EOF as
well as just some general idioms
already implemented for you for
Java programming and EOF programming.
And some third party sites,
the Omni Group and Stepwise sites,
they've got mailing lists,
community resources,
and technical articles both
on WebObjects and on EOF.
Who to contact?
webobjects@apple.com goes
to a bunch of people.
You can also use bugreport.apple.com.
And there's enterprise-level services
and consulting support if you
want to hire an Apple consultant.
And here's some stuff that somebody
else thought you should know about.